If you can take the nucleus of a raging
tumor cell and place it in the cytoplasm
of a non-tumor cell and you get
regulated growth
>> that rules that rules out any ankco gene
or tumor suppressor gene as being
responsible for the disregulated cell
growth and those experiments were done
in in vitro and in vivo broad a broad
range of these that's what brought me to
the idea that this cannot be a genetic
disease by any stretch of the
imagination
>> [music]
>> Hi everybody and welcome to Ultralife
today. My name is Kyle Drew, meat eating
tofu hating nutritionist. Glad that
you're here [music] joining us. Listen,
we've got an incredible show for you
today. Dr. Thomas Seaffrey joins us from
Boston College. What a guest. A lot of
you have watched him. A lot of you have
watched his podcast that he's been on
and he has really moved the needle over
in the ketogenic world now in the cancer
space. It is a tremendous interview.
It's going to be a little dense. There's
a It's a bit technical at times, but
it's well worth listening. If you know
someone who has active cancer, please
send them this link. This is crucially
important. We've actually broken it up
into two separate episodes. One long
interview, but two separate episodes.
We'll do another episode uh in the next
week or so. I need you to know that
Ultralife today is brought to you by
Ultra Botanica, the makers of the super
absorbable highintensity curcumin. You
can feel it's called UltraUur. Ultra Cur
that is powered by Prozorb technology.
Prozorb is just an absorption
technology. A lot of people want to get
the benefits of curcumin, but they can't
feel it. And it's because they're taking
garden variety curcumin or an inferior
absorption technology infused curcumin,
something like black pepper or something
like that. Liposals are a lot better.
Nothing touches prozorb. When you take
it, you can feel it. It's called
Ultraur. But more importantly for the
purposes of this episode, Ultra Botanica
are the makers of the pathway system of
products. Pathway system of products.
Pathways 1 2 3 and four. This is an
adjunctive supplement. When people are
going through cancer, it is not a
treatment. We do not treat it. We do not
prevent it. But it is nutritionally
supporting the rebalancing of metabolic
pathways that have been disrupted and
corrupted by cancer. Do not mistake it
for a medication. It is not a
medication. It's a series of dietary
supplements. You can go to ultratday.com
ultratay.com
and see the full line of Prozorbabled
products. We hope that you uh will and
we know that you will love them. Now
without further ado, let's start part
one to our conversation with Dr. Thomas
Seaff.
He is a professor of biology,
biochemistry, genetics at Boston
College. He is known everywhere. And I
first began to see him popping up years
ago in the thick of the ketogenic craze
and he sort of became kind of like a
patron saint. But where he really has
made a mark is with his research into
cancer. If you don't know his book,
here's the title. Cancer is a metabolic
disease. And if you don't know why that
is such an earthshattering
title and concept, you'll find out as we
go along. Professor Thomas Seaff Freed
is with us today. Dr. Seaff Freed, thank
you for joining us today.
>> Oh, thank you very much. It's nice to be
here.
>> I was very, very interested in visiting
with you again. and we've spoken before
on a radio show, but one of the things
that I think about is that an awful lot
of people
probably don't know why even that title
is so controversial for your book. And
maybe before we really go into why, can
we even go a little bit more granular? A
lot of people don't totally understand
what we mean by metabolic
and metabolism. Could we maybe start
with that and then jump off from there?
>> Yeah, we can do that. But the uh the
full title of my book was cancer as a
metabolic disease on the origin,
management and prevention of cancer and
it was by John Wy Press. I I have to
point out that there have been a couple
of hijacked versions with my name that I
didn't write.
>> I've seen you've seen these things,
right? They take my stuff from podcasts
and they use AI and synthesize it down
>> and then they say I wrote it and I
didn't.
>> So, I only wrote one. It's it's John Wy
Press is the book from 2012 and it's
actually a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder. Cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder and I think it's
important for people to start reading
more and more about our mitochondria. It
is the essence of our life and our
existence on the planet. And when that
organel becomes corrupted or inefficient
in certain ways, you can get a whole
range of chronic diseases as as well as
cancer. So it's important to know about
that organel, how it functions and how
it can be disrupted in its function
leading to disregulated cell growth
which ultimately is cancer. So that's
that's the essence of what we we need to
know. And that brought us into a very
deep dive on mitochondria, metabolism,
biochemistry, and all all of the
different things you need to know about
the origin of that organel and how it
how it participates in our overall
general health.
One of the things that is a telltale
sign that they have not gotten your book
even though the fake books still have
your name on it is the thickness of the
books. Your book is dense. It is well
researched and it is an easy read but it
is requires thought particularly
depending on if it's a rank lay person
reading it or not. Would you explain why
this is such a controversy and what the
predominant theory of cancer has always
been that you are challenging with this
book? Well, it's just it's the book was
in 2012
which pretty which laid out a pretty
solid argument against the prevailing
view that cancer is a genetic disease.
But since that time we we have published
many other peer-reviewed papers and
number of journals solidifying the view
that cancer is predominantly a
mitochondrial metabolic disease. The
controversy
um is involves the continual
belief that cancer is a genetic disease
and that's supported by the National
Cancer Institute's website which says
that cancer is a genetic disease. It
says it right on there.
>> It says cancer is a genetic disease
maybe ma made up of maybe hundreds of
different uh diseases with many many
different kinds of mutations. All of
that is nonsense. It's not data don't
don't support that concept. And I don't
I I've written to the NIH. They're
they're like bots. I don't think they
think they just do stuff
>> and it's consistent with what everybody
else thinks it should be. So the
continual persistence of the view by the
federal government and the academic
industry and the pharmaceutical industry
is that cancer is a genetic disease
driven by all kinds of mutations and
tumor suppressor genes and ankco genes
and you're constantly chasing these
things around for diagnostic and
therapeutic purposes and we're not we're
not getting anywhere. No. And
>> you got 1,700 people a day dying. 70 an
hour. And we've been doing the same
stuff for the last 50 years. And
nothing's changed. It's getting worse.
>> Nothing's changed.
>> Yeah. You know, that's the sad thing.
>> Well,
I asked you before we started uh
recording the show if this has been your
prevailing view. I said that you were a
professor among of other things uh
genetics. And if you think of yourself
as an expatriate of the genetic model
and you have always, it sounds like
questioned that model for cancer. Yeah.
>> No, I didn't. I just bought on to it
like like everybody all the other
non-thinkers.
>> So, um, so because that's what it said
in the textbooks. And when you're
teaching genetics out of the textbooks,
you know, and you say, well, okay, it's
a genetic disease, tumor suppressor
genes. And then in biochemistry, you got
the same thing. and cell biology, you
got the same thing. But but I wasn't
focusing on that in those days. I was
working in the field of epilepsy. So it
really wasn't uh genetics of epilepsy
and glyolippid biochemistry. So it
really wasn't central to what I was
doing anyway. And I just went along with
the crowd. If everybody says it, it must
be right.
>> Hard to push against it.
>> Yeah. You know, and then when you start
pushing against it, you get you get uh
weird looks by people.
>> Uhhuh.
>> You may have lost your bearings.
>> Yeah. Well, what was what began your
shift into a metabolic model?
>> Well, that started it sprang from our
our work with ketogenic metabolic
therapy for managing epilepsy, which is
a standard practice for managing
seizures in children. The question is
what is the mo what is the mechanism by
which shifting from a regular high carb
diet to a low carb high diet that
elevates ketones what is that how does
that stop epileptic seizures I mean this
this is still a very active research uh
focus
>> but we also were studying angioenesis in
brain cancer which is abnormal blood
vessels and um we started to see
similarities when you calorie restrict
animals with epilepsy the seizures go
down and when we calorie restricted mice
with brain tumors the angiogenesis went
way down and the tumor shrunk. So I said
well there seems to be seems to be
something here and then we we ran into
the looked big into the work of Otto
Warberg and he said that cancer was a a
metabolic disease and that um all
cancers have this dependency on glucose
because respiration was inefficient. So
I looked at and we started looking at
blood sugar and ketones in the animals
that were restricted and sure enough
blood sugar went down and ketones went
up
>> and the tumor shrunk
>> and then Warberg said this a long time
ago. um that initiated probably around
the year 2000 2001
>> brought my attention to that and then
when we started doing research in the
lab we were corroborating what Otto
Warberg had said then I did started to
do a real deep dive on autoberg who was
this guy of course he turns out to be
one of the giants in the field of
biochemistry
>> giants
>> and uh you know a very arrogant German
who actually had he thought he had all
the answers to the cancer problem and in
the end they threw his under the bus.
>> Uhhuh. Yeah. Well, and part of the work
that you've done that I think is every
bit as profound as laying out the
metabolic model. There's work that I the
way I think of it, Professor Seaff
Freed, is you've stood on the work of
Otto Warberg. You've seen what he got
right, but you also saw something that
he got wrong. I believe you and a
colleague from Budapest have published
on this. Talk about the additional thing
that you guys have found.
>> Yeah. Well, he he he he got he got
something wrong, but he also did not
know about something else. So, there's
there's two issues here. The first issue
is that he assumed that every mole of
oxygen consumed by either a normal cell
or a tumor cell was comparable to seven
moles of ATP produced which is the
currency of energy in our cells. And he
and he got that calculation from Hans
Krebs of the Kreb cycle. So and Krebs
was one of Warberg's students. So
because Warberg trained Krebs, Krebs
cannot be wrong. So, [laughter]
so, so we started to look deeply into uh
and of course everybody was saying that
Worerberg cannot be right because there
aren't some tumor cells that consume
oxygen just as avidly
as normal cells and normal cells consume
like tumor cells. So, he says they were
using oxygen consumption as an accurate
surrogate for ATP production through
oxidative phosphorilation. We we and
others have done some really
comprehensive experiments to show that
in cancer cells oxygen consumed is not
quantitatively linked to ATP produced.
>> It is in normal cells for sure but not
in tumor cells.
>> Not in tumor cells.
>> Yeah. So tumor cells consume oxygen but
they use the oxygen for the production
of reactive oxygen species which are
carcinogenic and mutagenic.
>> Yes. So you cannot quantify and and and
make an assumption that the oxygen
consumed in a tumor cell is equivalent
in energy production to oxygen consumed
in a normal cell. And Warberg made that
mistake and everybody make that mistake.
And they still make that mistake.
They're still using all of these devices
like the seahorse. They're spending five
$75,000 on the seahorse instrument
>> which is all calculations and not direct
measurements anyway. Uh uh so
>> I didn't realize that really
>> yeah you're not you're not doing direct
it's all based on uh adding these
different chemicals and it's over a
short term like 30 30 minutes of
experimentation maybe an hour at the
most. You you got to look at these tumor
cells over hours. We use a reserver
reserv oxygen consumption device that we
have here in the lab and we can monitor
all over over days oxygen consumption on
these tumor cells. So we were finding
that in normal cells if you add cyanide
which blocks cytochrome C oxygen
consumption goes goes way down. So we
were given s we were giving cyanide
potassium cyanide to the cancer cells
and oxygen was going way down but ATP
wasn't
>> interesting right so there's no
respiration going on
>> cancer cells can live in cyanide they
can live without oxygen so then then
what we did is we put them in glutamine
alone with no glucose and no oxygen and
then we were measuring ATP production
and where was this ATP production coming
from is coming from mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation
which is a very interesting mechanism
inside the mitochondria itself that
produces ATP independent of oxygen. It's
unbelievable. So
>> interesting.
>> Yeah. So this is where they're so
they're using a fermentation mechanism
in the very organel that's supposed to
get energy from rest.
>> Wow. Wow. This is an ancient we have a
big paper coming out on this and this
let me give you an example. When people
have heart attacks and and they stop
breathing, the bloodstream fills up with
lactic acid and suinic acid. This is
because you're not breathing. And it's
been known for a long time that lactic
acid is coming from the fermentation.
It's called lactic acid fermentation
using glucose as the fuel. And Warberg
knew this. And that was one of the
interesting things about cancer. They
continue to ferment even in the presence
of 100% oxygen.
But he never knew anything about the
suxinic acid. So we started looking into
su the the guys in the heart attack
field knew it all. They knew it and they
were saying that this suxinic acid is
coming from a amino acid fermentation
and that amino acid seems to be
glutamine. So, so, uh, we we added, uh,
labeled glutamine in cells that were no
oxygen and no glucose, and we were
finding, uh, labeled suinic acid
was. So, uh, that's the waste product of
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. All major cancers are
crapping out lactic acid and suinic
acid, the two fuels driving the
fermentation metabolism.
And I they've been knowing and they do
it in 100% oxygen. So in other words,
they're not respiring if they're
fermenting even in the presence of oxy.
So water warberg knew the lactic acid
story. He did not know about the suinic
acid story. Nor did he know about amino
acid fermentation. There's and that's
the key and this is something that's
really important because there are a lot
of lay people a lot of cancer patients
who once they begin reading they will
see the glucose link but many of them
have not heard about the glutamine link
and this is what is so important uh and
I and I think that there's implications
with regard to therapy even diet but the
glutamine link is fascinating And I
think that it has not filtered its way
into the general public yet the way
glucose has.
>> Yeah. Well, in the scientific
literature, you'll see many many papers
from top journals calling it cancers are
glutamine addicted. Addicted. Yeah.
Glutamine. They call it glutamine
addicted. They know that tumor cells
need a lot of glutamine. But here's the
situation. There's what we call
anoplurosis. This is a term that means
the replenishment of carbons to the to
the TCA cycle, the KB cycle. And many
investigators were under the assumption
that the glutamine entering the cancer
cell was respired, not fermented,
because the cancer cell is taking in
oxygen. It's producing ATP in the
mitochondria
and glutamine is being used. And they
said, "Oh, it's coming into the
mitochondria. It's being fully
oxidized."
But but if if that's the case, they
should not be ever producing suinic acid
as a waste product.
>> So the so the glutamine is metabolized
to glutamate and then through a
transamination reaction it it it's it's
metabolized to the metabolite called
alpha ketoglutarate which is part of the
KB cycle. Alpha ketoglutarate is then
metabolized to suaninealil coa and that
suanil coa to suxenate produces ATP
through a substrate level
phosphorilation reaction. It's
unbelievable.
>> Now in normal cells it's doing that but
it's a tiny amount of ATP produced in
the cycle. In the cancer cell it's a
buttload of ATP being.
>> Yeah. So, so, so the suinic acid should
suinate should stay in the cycle if it's
going to be fully oxidized. But because
it's has a it it has an incapacity of
oxidative phosphorilation, it blows the
suinic acid out as a waste product of
amino acid fermentation just like it
blows lactic acid out as a waste product
of cytoolic substrate level
phosphorilation. So the cancer cell is
getting energy from two substrate level
phosphorilation reactions independent of
oxidative phosphorilation which is
inefficient
>> right inefficient. And to me what that
does is change the game that you've
already you and others have already
helped to change even further. It moves
it further downstream into the metabolic
model. It just it becomes irrefutable.
And yet the conventional docs, the
conventional researchers that are
relying on the textbooks, it's just so
hard for them to turn around, it seems
like. Yeah.
>> Well, they're locked into molecular
biology and gene chasing.
>> And when you're chasing genes, you're
not thinking of the biochemical
reactions responsible for energy because
without energy, nothing can survive. ATP
is the gold standard.
>> So all of the stuff that most people are
studying are downstream effects of all
kinds of things. All of the hallmarks of
cancer are all downstream effects of the
shift from oxidative phosphorilation to
substrate level phosphorilation
and you know the HIF1 alpha which is a
transcription factor that becomes
stabilized and drives the glycolytic
pathway producing lactic acid uh that
Greg Smensa received the Nobel Prize for
his work on Hifw1 alpha and how in
hypoxia it becomes stabilized to
increase cytoolic substrate level
phosphorilation as a means to get
energy. Well, here's a very interesting
phenomenon. When you have hypoxia, you
also produce suinic acid through the
ferment. Like I said, the heart attack
patients are dumping out acid. Suxinic
acid also stabilizes Hif one alpha
thereby driving the fermentation in the
cytool.
It's our view now that the key to cancer
is mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation producing suinic acid
which then stabilizes Hif. So Hif again
is another downstream effect of
mitochondrial substrate level fos.
>> Another downstream effect. You're
mentioning you've you've mentioned
mitochondria. Let's talk about that for
a minute. You know the evidence that
you've compiled and published and
written about is really talking about
what happens when mitochondria fail or
break down. uh and and uh it shifts from
a efficient energy production to a
backup primitive function visav
fermentation. One question that's very
basic is what is causing those
mitochondria to fail in the first place.
Well, that was Albert St. Gorgi's
ankogenic paradox which we solved. We
solved the paradox because people were
always asking what is the com. In fact,
if you look at Sid Mukerji's book, The
Emperor of All Malades, which was a New
York Times bestseller, he asks in there
many, many times, what is the common
pathophysiological mechanism that can
link all of these disparate
cancer-causing agents to a disregulated
cell growth?
>> And Albert St. Gorgi asked the same
thing, and he called it a ancogenic
paradox. So what we did is I went
through all of the things that we know
have been linked to cancer like
carcinogens. When you say what is a
carcin a carcinogen is any chemical that
has a potential to cause disregulated
cell growth which is which is cancer.
But how does a carcinogen cause cancer?
Well according to the somatic mutation
theory it causes DNA mutations
>> and that's how they think you get
disregulated cell growth. But you also
find that many of these carcinogens
enter the mitochondria and they
bofllores and they damage oxidative
phosphorilation. So you have this
conundrum then well which is the chicken
and the egg. It does carcinogens cause
cancer because they cause mutations in
the DNA or does it cause cancer by
disrupting oxidative phosphorilation
leading to a compensatory substrate
level phosphorilation? Before I get into
the actual nitty-gritty of the mechanism
that happens, you have to then look at
radiation, intermittent hypoxia,
inflammation, rare inherited mutations.
You have to look at uh microlastics,
forever chemicals. We went through every
kind of a risk factor. We found out that
all germline cancer risk factors all
damage oxidative phosphorilation. So the
genes are all BAL one, leaf many, Lynch
syndrome. We went through have a big
paper coming out on this showing that
all these so-called genetic risk factors
all damage oxidative phosphorilation
leading to a compensatory substrate
level phosphorilation. But but the
question is okay carcinogens do cause
mutations in DNA. How do you know
whether those mutations are responsible
for disregulated cell growth? And the
answer is in general only only if they
damage only if mitochondria are damaged
do you get disregulated cell growth. The
nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments excluded genetic mutations
as the origin of disregulated cell
growth because you can take the nucleus
of a raging tumor cell and place it in
the cytoplasm of a non-tumor cell and
you get regulated growth.
>> That rules that rules out any ankco gene
or tumor suppressor gene as being
responsible for the disregulated cell
growth. And those experiments were done
in in vitro and in vivo broad a broad
range of these. That's what brought me
to the idea that this cannot be a
genetic disease by any stretch of the
imag. But here's the key and this is the
golden all of these downstream effects
like the hallmarks of cancer which is
you know angiogenesis disregulated
regulated growth and all this when
mitochondria become corrupted and they
can't generate energy efficiency through
oxidative phosphorilation as we said you
get a compensatory substrate level
phosphorilation which is replacing the
availability of energy from fermenta
fermentation is replacing oxidative
phosphorilation. But that still doesn't
tell us. It just tells us where the
energy is coming from to drive the
disregulated growth. But where do you
get the disregulated growth from in the
first place?
>> Okay, so here's the situation. In the
inner membrane of the mitochondria,
there's a there's an enriched lipid
called cardiolipin.
>> Cardiolipin is enriched in the inner
membrane of the mitochondria.
It it intimately it intimately interacts
with the proteins of the electron
transport chain. It interacts with what
we call calcium
um um uh calcium transporters in the
inner membrane of the mitochondria.
Okay, mitochondrial calcium transporters
are controlled by cardioipin. Electron
transport chain proteins are controlled
by cardioipin. So what we have never
found there's no tumor ever found to
have normal content or composition of
cardioipin. So cardioin controls calcium
signaling. Mitochondria control calcium
signaling throughout the cell. The cell
cycle cell cycle itself has checkpoints
to control cell division. And those
checkpoints are under the control of
mitochondria generated calcium
signaling. So when the cardio when the
cardioipin lipid is abnormal, calcium
signaling gets haywire. The cells no
longer respect contact inhibition and
they it's like the cell cycle no longer
has any checkpoints. It start it falls
back on the ancient pathways of
fermentation which were unbridled
proliferation. Exactly. Or you put all
this stuff together.
>> Goodness.
You know,
>> it becomes a unifying theory.
>> Absolutely. We now we now know exactly
how to we know exactly what's causing
disregulated cell growth, why there's no
contact inhibition, why they're blowing
out fermentation metabolism, and better
yet, we know how to manage the disease.
very simply
>> that's and that is is ultimately what it
comes down to is what the implications
are both for prevention and for
treatment. Again, a lot of people who
have been just casually ketogenic for
whatever reason have keyed in on a lot
of what you're saying. I am wondering
first if you have any sense of
what the implications are for preventing
cancer in the first place, lifestyle
changes, dietary changes, etc.
>> Yeah. Well, that's why we developed the
glucose ketone index calculator. It was
it was first produced to manage brain
cancer. But now we know that all chronic
diseases in cancer stem from damage to
mitochondrial dysfunction. So if you can
keep your mitochondria healthy, the
probability of getting cancer is very
low. The risk is very low.
>> Incredible.
>> And also other chronic diseases as well.
Type two diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, dementia. you you go the the
the issue about some of these other
conditions which which you have
mitochondrial dysfunction without
corresponding disregulated cell growth.
Usually that happens uh the cells die
because there are certain cells that
can't switch to fermentation because of
the types of cells they are like neurons
in the brain and cardiac sites. They
never become cancer rarely if ever
because they can't transition to
fermentation. So they up and die.
>> Interesting. So you know why certain
cells can become cancer and why other
cells cannot become cancer. So in using
a GKI you always keep low glucose and
elevated ketones putting ourselves
metabolically back in the paleolithic
state of our existence. There we go.
There we go. All right. I hope that you
enjoyed uh the part one to our
conversation with Dr. Thomas Seaff
Freed. I'll tell you what, part two
becomes very very practical. Dr. Seaff
Freed gets really really practical. We
talk about diet. We talk about exercise.
We talk about supplements. We talk about
fenbendazol, meendazol and these
antiparasitic drugs that so many people
are taking and why they seem to be
having an effect. This is worth sending
to your friends who have an active
diagnosis. Again, we are not doctors. We
are not giving medical advice. This is
just the sharing of information. Uh
we're so glad that you watched it. Make
sure and send it to your friends. And
thank you so much for watching [music]
Ultral Life today.
[music]